LTO build profile extension documentation (#1219)
ARMmbed/Handbook: docs/api/memory/link_time_optimization.md

# Link Time Optimization

Link Time Optimization (LTO) is a program memory usage optimization mechanism performed by compiler at link time. At compile time compiler creates special intermediate represention of all translation units and then optimize them as a single unit at link time resulting in much better optimization comparing to non-LTO builds.

## Using LTO in Mbed OS

In Mbed OS build system LTO is implemented as an optional profile extension placed in `tools\profiles\extensions\lto.json`. When enabled, build profile is amended with LTO flags. LTO perform heavy memory optimizations what breaks debugging, so it's not recommended to enable it in debug/develop profiles.

To enable LTO retype `--profile` option with LTO file path `tools\profiles\extensions\lto.json`

> <span class="notes">**Note**: For profile extensions you have to put full path relative to Mbed OS root folder.</span>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<span class="notes">**Note**: For profile extensions you have to put full path relative to the project's root folder.</span>
```
E.g. when building `mbed-cloud-client-example` I have to compile with `mbed compile -t GCC_ARM -m K64F --profile mbed-os/tools/profiles/release.json --profile mbed-os/tools/profiles/extensions/lto.json`. Notice that `mbed-os` is present in the path.

Author: fixed

To enable LTO together with `release` profile:
```
mbed compile -t TOOLCHAIN -m TARGET --profile release --profile tools/profiles/extensions/lto.json
```

<span class="notes">**Note**: In LTO builds compiler produce bytecode/bitcode instead of regular object code. And it's hard to analyse this output by object code analysis tools.</span>

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we say something about the good side of the LTO as well? e.g. how much ROM/RAM can be saved in terms of blinky example and PDMC example? doesn't need to be with too many details, a table about roughly how many bytes can be saved would be good enough

Author: updated

> ## Limitations

Reviewer 2: Also, I suggest in the Limitation section to mention the impact to the debuggability also the impact to the symbol size, which disruption to memory map generation.  even we briefly mentioned above. here is an article that could be useful https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/best-and-worst-gcc-clang-compiler-flags#-flto

Author: updated

### IAR

- There is no LTO available for IAR compiler.

> ### GCC_ARM

Reviewer 2: Do we have any know limitation need to mention for ARMC6 LTO? I can see a lot ot place we need to add MBED_USED macro.

- The minimal required version of the `GCC_ARM` is now the GNU Arm Embedded Toolchain Version 9-2019-q4-major. Earlier `GCC_ARM` versions can cause various issues when the `-flto` flag is used.

> - The `noinline` attribute has to be used for every function that must be placed into a specific section (specified with a `section(".section_name")` attribute). In general, when a function is considered for inlining, the `section` attribute is always ignored. However, with the link-time optimizer enabled, the chances for inlining are much higher because the inliner works across multiple translation units. As a result, the output sections' sizes change compared to a non-lto build. `This may lead to a section ".section_name" will not fit in region "region_name"` type errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `noinline` attribute has to be used for every function that must be placed into a specific section (specified with a `section(".section_name")` attribute). In general, when a function is considered for inlining, the `section` attribute is always ignored. However, with the link-time optimizer enabled, the chances for inlining are much higher because the inliner works across multiple translation units. As a result, the output sections' sizes change compared to a non-lto build. This may lead to a `section ".section_name" will not fit in region "region_name"` type errors.
```
(formatting of the last sentence)

Author: fixed

# Link Time Optimization

> Link Time Optimization (LTO) is a program memory usage optimization mechanism that the compiler performs at link time. At compile time, the compiler creates a special intermediate representation of all translation units. It then optimizes them as a single unit at link time, which uses less memory than non-LTO builds.

Reviewer 3: What is link time? What are translation units?

Author: translation unit it's usually single C/C++ source file .c/.cpp which is then compiled (compilation time) to single object file .o/.obj and then linker links (link time) this object files in to single executable file

> Link Time Optimization (LTO) is a program memory usage optimization mechanism performed by compiler at link time. At compile time compiler creates special intermediate represention of all translation units and then optimize them as a single unit at link time resulting in much better optimization comparing to non-LTO builds.

Reviewer 2: typo: representation -> representation

Author: fixed

## Using LTO in Mbed OS

> The Mbed OS build system implements LTO as an optional profile extension in `tools\profiles\extensions\lto.json`. Enabling LTO amends the build profile with LTO flags. LTO performs heavy memory optimizations that break debugging, so it's recommended to use it only with release profile.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Mbed OS build system implements LTO as an optional profile extension in `tools\profiles\extensions\lto.json`. Enabling LTO amends the build profile with LTO flags. 

<span class="notes">**Note:** LTO performs heavy memory optimizations that break debugging, so we recommend using it only with the release profile, not debugging and develop.</span>
```

> The Mbed OS build system implements LTO as an optional profile extension in `tools\profiles\extensions\lto.json`. Enabling LTO amends the build profile with LTO flags. LTO performs heavy memory optimizations that break debugging, so we don't recommend enabling it in debug or develop profiles.

Reviewer 3: Would it make more sense to list the one profile we recommend it for, rather than the two we don't?

Author: updated

> To enable LTO, retype the `--profile` option with LTO file path `tools\profiles\extensions\lto.json`.

Reviewer 3: When did we type it the first time?

Author: First one is when selecting build profile.
`mbed compile -t TOOLCHAIN -m TARGET --profile release --profile mbed-os/tools/profiles/extensions/lto.json`

Author: updated

> To enable LTO add `--profile` option with LTO file path `tools\profiles\extensions\lto.json` to the build command.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To enable LTO, add the `--profile` option with the LTO file path `tools\profiles\extensions\lto.json` to the build command.
```

<span class="notes">**Note**: For profile extensions you have to put the full path relative to the project's root folder.</span>

To enable LTO with the `release` profile:

```
mbed compile -t TOOLCHAIN -m TARGET --profile release --profile mbed-os/tools/profiles/extensions/lto.json
```

Example LTO profile memory savings for [mbed-os-example-blinky](https://github.com/ARMmbed/mbed-os-example-blinky):

> |Build type|Total static RAM memory (data + BSS)|Total flash memory (text + data)|

Reviewer 3: What's BSS?

Author: All `data` `BSS` and `text` are a segments of memory to store different type of variables/data

| --- | --- | --- |

> | GCC_ARM - release - no LTO | 12,096B | 44,628B |

Reviewer 3: Do we expect these numbers to change? If so, we should remove the table, so we don't have to keep updating it.

Author: Frankly only amount of saved memory  is important. But true, it will change slightly depending on Mbed OS version used.

Maybe it would be better to round the numbers to kB like below example?
What do you think @jamesbeyond ?

|Build type|Total Static RAM memory (data + bss)|Total Flash memory (text + data)|
| --- | --- | --- |
| GCC_ARM - release - no LTO | 12.1 kB | 44.6 kB |
| GCC_ARM - release - LTO | 11.8 kB | 41.1 kB |
|***saved memory***| 0.3 kB| 3.5 kB|
| ARM - release - no LTO | 10.36 kB | 35.5 kB |
| ARM - release - LTO | 10.15 kB | 31.5 kB |
|***saved memory***| 0.21 kB|‭ 4 kB|

| GCC_ARM - release - LTO | 11,800B | 41,088B |
|***saved memory***|296B|3,540B|
| ARM - release - no LTO | 10,365B | 35,496B |
| ARM - release - LTO | 10,153B | 31,514B |
|***saved memory***|212B|‭3,982‬B|

> LTO profile build results for [mbed-cloud-client-example](https://github.com/ARMmbed/mbed-cloud-client-example)

Reviewer 4: Are lines 19 and 30 the same thing for two different examples? The words is so different I'm not sure.

Author: It's not the same. It show how much we gain for simple application (line 19)  and complex application (line 30).

|Build type|Total Static RAM memory (data + BSS)|Total Flash memory (text + data)|
| --- | --- | --- |

> | GCC_ARM - release - no LTO | 59,760B | 389,637B |

Reviewer 3: Do we expect these numbers to change? If so, we should remove the table, so we don't have to keep updating it.

| GCC_ARM - release - LTO | 59,432B | 354,167B |
|***saved memory***| 328B | ‭35,470‬B|
| ARM - release - no LTO | 58,099B | 353,849B |
| ARM - release - LTO | 57,150B | 322,500B |
|***saved memory***| 949B | ‭31,349‬B|

<span class="notes">**Note**: In LTO builds, the compiler produces bytecode/bitcode instead of regular object code. It's hard to analyze this output with object code analysis tools.</span>

> ## Limitations

Reviewer 3: Could we move most or all of Limitations to our release notes? That may be a better place for this content.

Author: ping @jamesbeyond

> - LTO slows down build process.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- LTO slows down the build process.
```

- It’s very hard to control memory placement when using LTO.

> - LTO performs heavy memory optimizations that break debugging.

Reviewer 4: We've said this already in the main text

> - In LTO builds, the compiler produce bytecode/bitcode instead of regular object code. It's hard to analyze this output with object code analysis tools.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- In LTO builds, the compiler produces bytecode/bitcode instead of regular object code. It's hard to analyze this output with object code analysis tools.
```

Reviewer 4: We've said this already in the main text

- LTO could cause increases to the stack space needed due to cross-object inlining.

> ### Arm

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Arm Compiler 6
```

Reviewer 4: If any of these apply only to ARMC5, please remove them - we don't support ARMC5 in Mbed OS 6

Author: I think that all apply for ARM 6 @kjbracey-arm can you confirm ?

- No bitcode libraries: armlink only supports bitcode objects on the command line. It does not support bitcode objects coming from libraries. armlink gives an error message if it encounters a file containing bitcode while loading from a library.
- Partial Linking is not supported with LTO as it only works with elf objects not bitcode files.

> - Arm recommends that link time optimization is only performed on code and data that does not require precise placement in the scatter file, with general input section selectors such as *(+RO) and .ANY(+RO) used to select sections generated by link time optimization. It is not possible to match bitcode in .llvmbc sections by name in a scatter file.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Arm recommends that link time optimization is only performed on code and data that does not require precise placement in the scatter file, with general input section selectors such as `*(+RO)` and `.ANY(+RO)` used to select sections generated by link time optimization. It is not possible to match bitcode in `.llvmbc` sections by name in a scatter file.
```

Reviewer 4: Had to put the `*` in code ears or it makes everything else italics.

- Bitcode objects are not guaranteed to be compatible across compiler versions. This means that you should ensure all your bitcode files are built using the same version of the compiler when linking with LTO.

> ### IAR

Reviewer 4: We don't support IAR in the 6 docs; you can remove this bit.

Author: removed

- There is no LTO available for the IAR compiler.

### GCC_ARM

> - The minimal required version of `GCC_ARM` is now the GNU Arm Embedded Toolchain Version 9-2019-q4-major. Earlier `GCC_ARM` versions can cause various issues when the `-flto` flag is used, for example a platform-specific error during the final link stage on Windows hosts with GCC8.

Reviewer 4: What does "now" mean? This is also the version listed for Mbed OS 6 (on the VPN: https://os.mbed.com/docs/mbed-os/development/build-tools/index.html) so it's really the only option. In other words: do we need "now"?

> - The `noinline` attribute has to be used for every function that must be placed into a specific section (specified with a `section(".section_name")` attribute). In general, when a function is considered for inlining, the `section` attribute is always ignored. However, with the link-time optimizer enabled, the chances for inlining are much higher because the inliner works across multiple translation units. As a result, the output sections' sizes change compared to a non-lto build. This may lead to `section ".section_name" will not fit in region "region_name"` type errors.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- You must use the `noinline` attribute for every function that must be placed into a specific section (specified with a `section(".section_name")` attribute). In general, when a function is considered for inlining, the `section` attribute is always ignored. However, with the link time optimizer enabled, the chances for inlining are much higher because the inliner works across multiple translation units. As a result, the output sections' sizes change compared to a non-lto build. This may lead to `section ".section_name" will not fit in region "region_name"` type errors.
```

> - There is a bug in all GCC versions causing that LTO removes C functions declared as weak in assembler (see https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=83967 https://bugs.launchpad.net/gcc-arm-embedded/+bug/1747966). The Mbed OS build system provides a fix for this. In case of exporting Mbed OS project to other build system the problem will emerge. This can be fixed by changing the order of object files in the linker command. Objects providing the weak symbols and compiled from assembly must be listed before the objects providing the strong symbols.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- In all GCC versions, LTO removes C functions declared as weak in assembler (see https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=83967 https://bugs.launchpad.net/gcc-arm-embedded/+bug/1747966). For Mbed OS, the problem emerges when exporting Mbed OS projects to other build systems. You can fix this by changing the order of object files in the linker command: Objects providing the weak symbols and compiled from assembly must be listed before the objects providing the strong symbols.
```
